---
layout: post
title: "Making 3D plots in Veusz"
date: 2018-06-03
---

Veusz 3.0 includes support for 3D plots. Currently implemented plot
types include point plots, surface plots, functional surface and line
plots and volume plots. This post is a guide for how this works.

## The 3D scene (scene3d)

3D plotting in Veusz uses the same widget scheme as 2D plotting, but
first the user should add a 3D scene widget (scene3d) to the
page. Alternatively, the user can make a new document with a 3D graph
(see the File, New menu). The scene is a 3D volume which is viewed on
the page. All 3D widgets must be placed within a scene or its
subwidgets. The scene controls the viewing angle to the 3D widgets and
the distance of the origin of the graph to the viewer. See Rendering
below for more details about how the rendering works.

### Sizing

By default the view of the scene is automatically scaled up to fill
the bounding box of the scene3d widget. This is controlled by the
"Size" setting of the scene. The default "Auto" value can be changed
to be a number which gives the scaling. Fixed scales can be useful to
give a consistent plot size which does not vary by viewing angle,
which is helpful to create animations.

### Viewing angle

The viewing angle is specified by the user as three rotation angles in
degrees around three axes. These axes are not the axes of any
graphs. The z axis lies along the line of sight through the 3D
origin. The x axis lies horizontally on the page through the 3D
origin. The y axis lies vertically on the page through that origin.

### Distance

The origin is the default location of a 3D graph. It lies at a
distance to the viewer controlled by the "Distance" setting of the
graph, where the default graph size has a size of 1. When the distance
is smaller, the effect of perspective is greater. By increasing the
distance, the graph can becomes close to an isometric projection. With
the default automatic scaling, the size on the page does not change.

|Distance 5                                         | Distance 50                                         |
|---------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------|
|![Graph of distance 5](/media/3d_errors_dist5.png) | ![Graph of distance 50](/media/3d_errors_dist50.png)|

### Lighting

The colour of solid surfaces is determined by their intrinsic colour,
plus an additive effect of lighting. The angle from the light source,
the light source colour and intensity and the surface reflectively are
used to calculate an additional colour contribution to the surface. Up
to three light sources can be defined in the scene. The position of
the light sources are defined relative to the camera or viewer, not
the graph. Positive values for X, Y and Z positions lie to the right,
upwards and towards the graph, respectively.

## Line widths and marker sizes

Normally in Veusz, sizes of objects (e.g. plot markers) are given in
physical units. This makes less sense for a 3D plot as sizes can
depend on distance. In a 3D graph sizes of plotting markers and line
widths are given in 1/1000 of the graph bounding box maximum
dimension.

## The 3D graph (graph3d)

One or more 3D graph widgets are placed in the scene3d widget. The
default location in 3D space of this widget is the origin 0,0,0. If
you want to use more than one, they currently must be manually
positioned. Each 3D graph widget also has a size in each dimension (by
default 1,1,1). Currently, if the graph size overlaps the
viewer/camera, then the output will look strange.  The graph has
formatting settings for its surrounding lines and the surface of the
rear faces.

|[Multiple 3D graph widgets in a single scene](/media/3d_multigraph.vsz)|
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------|
|![Multiple graph3d widgets](/media/3d_multigraph.png)                  |

## 3D axes (axis3d)

The 3D graph contains three or more 3D axis (axis3d) widgets, with at
least one for each dimension. This is analogous to the standard 2D
graph with two or more axis widgets. The widget has options for the
axis label, tick labels, tick marks and grid lines (which appear on
the outside of the 3D cube). An axis can be switched between linear and
logarithmic mode. Scalings can be applied to the data values plotted
in that dimension or to the axis labels.

Similarly to the 2D axis, the 3D axis has positions which allow it to
appear mid-way down the cube in the other dimensions. This allows the
user to add multiple non-overlapping axes for each dimension.

|[Multiple 3D axis widgets in a single graph](/media/3d_multiaxes.vsz) |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------|
|![Multiple axis3d widgets](/media/3d_multiaxes.png)                   |

## 3D plotters

Similarly to the 2D graph, the 3D graph contains one or more
plotters. Unlike the 2D graph, the ordering does not matter. We list
the various plotter types here.

## 3D point plotter (point3d)

This plotter takes three 1D datasets giving X, Y and Z values. Points
are plotted at each position. Optionally, a line connecting the points
is plotted. A fourth dataset (Size) can be provided which scales the
size of each point. Another dataset can be provided to colour the
markers or the line (a minimum, maximum and scale can be set to give
the scaling). The colour map used for plotting is provided under the
formatting settings (for marker fill and line).

The point plotter also supports error bars in each dimension,
similarly to the 2D plot.

|[3D point plotting example](/media/3d_points.vsz)|
|-------------------------------------------------|
|![point3d example](/media/3d_points.png)         |

### 3D function plotter (function3d)

Plots either a functional line in 3D space or a functional
surface. The type of plot is given by the mode parameter. In the case
of the line, the x,y,z coordinates can be specified as a function of
t, where t goes from 0 to 1, or by giving functions for two of the
coordinates as a function of the other. For a surface, the value for
x, y or z is given as a function of the other two. In addition, a
function returning 0 to 1 can be provided for the colour, which
specifies the colour map value for the surface at each position or the
line col-or. For a 2D surface, the grid lines or surface fill can be
hidden or shown. There are also settings giving the number of function
evaluations to compute in each direction for a surface, or in one
direction for a line.

|[3d line function](/media/3d_function_line.vsz)   |[3d surface function](/media/3d_function_surface.vsz)   |
|--------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------|
|![function3d (line)](/media/3d_function_line.png) | ![function3d (surface)](/media/3d_function_surface.png)|

### 3D surface plotter (surface3d)

Plots a two dimensional surface from data values. The user should
provide a 2D dataset for the height of a surface. The x, y or z axis
for the height and other directions can be chosen. A second 2D dataset
can be provided for the colour of the surface at each point. Note that
the coordinate of the 2D dataset lies at the centre of each 2D grid
point. The height of the grid at the edge is calculated by linear
interpolation. Normally the grid is surrounded by four lines and the
surface by two triangles. If a high resolution option is enabled, the
each grid point is surrounded by eight lines and the surface drawn by
eight triangles.

|[3D surface plotting example](/media/3d_mandel_surface.vsz) |
|------------------------------------------------------------|
|![surface3d example](/media/3d_mandel_surface.png)          |

### 3D volume plotter (volume3d)

Plots 3D volumes drawn as rectangular cubes. In this widget, for a
volume described by A×B×C values, then the user should provide four
datasets, each containing up to A×B×C values (there can be holes in
the representation). Three of the datasets give coordinates of the
centers of the 3D cells and the fourth the colour of the cell. An
example set of datasets would be X=(0,0,0,0,1,1,1,1),
Y=(0,0,1,1,0,0,1,1), Z=(0,1,0,1,0,1,0,1),
color=(0.1,0.2,0.3,0.4,0.3,0.2,0.1,0). Additionally, the user can
provide a transparency dataset, which can be useful for showing or
hiding parts of the 3D space.

|[3D volume example](/media/3d_volume.vsz)     |
|----------------------------------------------|
|![volume3d example](/media/3d_volume.png)     |

## Rendering and output issues

Note that Veusz does not use a standard method for making 3D output
(e.g. OpenGL). This is so Veusz can produce vector rather than bitmap
or raster output. A future version could also support OpenGL for
speed.

In detail, Veusz renders the 3D scene by making a list of lines,
points, text and triangles from each widget. These are then projected
onto 2D space at the viewer/camera and rendered.

By default, Veusz uses a naive Painter's Algorithm to draw the
scene. It draws from the back of scene to the front. The main problem
with this algorithm is that shapes and lines overlapping in depth can
be confused as the depth of each object is calculated at only one
point. The has problems for long objects.  In addition objects may
intersect, which is not properly treated. In the scene3d object, the
user can switch to a different rendering mode called BSP. In this more
accurate BSP mode, the objects are split so that they never overlap
from any viewing angle. The disadvantage of this mode is that it is
slow, uses a lot of memory and produces large output files. We plan in
future to add another mode which handles overlaps better and does not
unnecessarily split objects.

When transparency is used in the plot, it may be possible to see the
triangles which make up surfaces. This is due to a problem in Qt where
if two triangles are plotted next to each other, the drawing of smooth
(anti-aliased) edges causes the gap to be visible. This is also seen
in PDF output as PDF viewers do a similar thing.

## Possible future improvements

  * Better algorithm than Painter's or BSP for rendering

  * 3D bar plotter

  * 3D image viewer (though the surface widget can do this)

  * 3D contours

  * 3D graph grid

  * 3D shapes

  * Text labels on point plotter

  * GUI control for rotating the view

  * Better examples and tutorial
